docs(weave): Add a Getting Started guide that uses Inference service, move Inference page out of "Integrations" (#5186)
wandb/weave: docs/docs/quickstart-inference.md

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Learn Weave with W&B Inference

This guide shows you how to use W&B Weave with [W&B Inference](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/inference/). Using W&B Inference, you can build and trace LLM applications using live open-source models without setting up your own infrastructure or managing API keys from multiple providers. Just obtain your W&B API key and use it to interact with [all models hosted by W&B Inference](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/inference/models/).

## What you'll learn

In this guide, you'll:
- Set up Weave and W&B Inference
- Build a simple LLM application with automatic tracing
- Compare multiple models
- Evaluate model performance on a dataset
- View your results in the Weave UI

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, you need a [W&B account](https://app.wandb.ai/login?signup=true) and an API key from from [https://wandb.ai/authorize](https://wandb.ai/authorize).

> Then, in a Python environment running version 3.8 or later, install the required libraries: 

Author: Fixed

```bash
pip install weave openai
```

The `openai` library is installed because you use the standard `openai` client to interact with W&B Inference, regardless of which hosted model you're actually calling. This allows you to swap between supported models by only changing the slug, and make use of any existing code you have that was written to use the OpenAI API. 

## Step 1: Trace your first LLM call

> Start with a simple example that uses Llama 3.1-8B through W&B Inference. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start with a basic example that uses Llama 3.1-8B through W&B Inference. 
```
This is a nit, but I try to avoid the word "simple" because it's a subjective opinion and the example might not be simple to everyone. IMO, basic works better.

- Traces your LLM call automatically
- Logs inputs, outputs, latency, and token usage
- Provides a link to view your trace in the Weave UI

```python
import weave
import openai

# Initialize Weave - replace with your-team/your-project
weave.init("my-first-weave-project")

# Create an OpenAI-compatible client pointing to W&B Inference
client = openai.OpenAI(
    base_url='https://api.inference.wandb.ai/v1',
    api_key="YOUR_WANDB_API_KEY",  # Replace with your actual API key
    project="my-first-weave-project",  # Required for usage tracking
)

# Decorate your function to enable tracing; use the standard OpenAI client
@weave.op()
def ask_llama(question: str) -> str:
    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a helpful assistant."},
            {"role": "user", "content": question}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

# Call your function - Weave automatically traces everything
result = ask_llama("What are the benefits of using W&B Weave for LLM development?")
print(result)
```

## Step 2: Build a text summarization application

> Create a simple summarization app that shows how Weave traces nested operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a basic summarization app that shows how Weave traces nested operations:
```

> Create a simple summarization app that shows how Weave traces nested operations:

Author: I went with adding the import statements since this code is such a new kettle of fish.

    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "Create a 2-3 sentence summary based on these key points."},
            {"role": "user", "content": f"Key points:\n{points_text}"}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

@weave.op()
def summarize_text(text: str) -> dict:
    """Main summarization pipeline."""
    key_points = extract_key_points(text)
    summary = create_summary(text, key_points)
    return {
        "key_points": key_points,
        "summary": summary
    }

# Try it with sample text
sample_text = """
The Apollo 11 mission was a historic spaceflight that landed the first humans on the Moon 
on July 20, 1969. Commander Neil Armstrong and lunar module pilot Buzz Aldrin descended 
to the lunar surface while Michael Collins remained in orbit. Armstrong became the first 
person to step onto the Moon, followed by Aldrin 19 minutes later. They spent about 
two and a quarter hours together outside the spacecraft, collecting samples and taking photographs.
"""

result = summarize_text(sample_text)
print("Key Points:", result["key_points"])

> print("\nSummary:", result["summary"])

Author: LOL 
Changed the prompt to, "create a one-sentence summary" instead of a 2-3 sentence summary. :)

    
    @weave.op()
    def predict(self, question: str) -> str:
        response = client.chat.completions.create(
            model=self.model_name,
            messages=[
                {"role": "user", "content": question}
            ],
        )
        return response.choices[0].message.content

# Create instances for different models
llama_model = InferenceModel(model_name="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct")
deepseek_model = InferenceModel(model_name="deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3-0324")

# Compare their responses
test_question = "Explain quantum computing in one paragraph for a high school student."

print("Llama 3.1 8B response:")
print(llama_model.predict(test_question))
print("\n" + "="*50 + "\n")
print("DeepSeek V3 response:")
print(deepseek_model.predict(test_question))
```

## Step 4: Evaluate model performance

Evaluate how well different models perform on a Q&A task:

```python
# Create a simple dataset
dataset = [
    {"question": "What is 2 + 2?", "expected": "4"},
    {"question": "What is the capital of France?", "expected": "Paris"},
    {"question": "Name a primary color", "expected_one_of": ["red", "blue", "yellow"]},
]

# Define a scorer
@weave.op()

> def accuracy_scorer(expected: str, output: str, expected_one_of: list[str] = None) -> dict:

Author: Fixed

    
    if expected_one_of:
        is_correct = any(option.lower() in output_clean for option in expected_one_of)
    else:
        is_correct = expected.lower() in output_clean
    
    return {"correct": is_correct, "score": 1.0 if is_correct else 0.0}

# Evaluate a model
@weave.op()
def evaluate_model(model: InferenceModel, dataset: list[dict]) -> dict:
    """Run evaluation on a dataset."""
    scores = []
    
    for example in dataset:
        # Get model prediction
        output = model.predict(example["question"])
        
        # Score the output
        score = accuracy_scorer(
            expected=example.get("expected", ""),
            output=output,
            expected_one_of=example.get("expected_one_of")
        )
        scores.append(score["score"])
    
    return {
        "model": model.model_name,
        "accuracy": sum(scores) / len(scores),
        "total_correct": sum(scores),
        "total_examples": len(dataset)
    }

# Run evaluation
results = evaluate_model(llama_model, dataset)
print(f"Model: {results['model']}")
print(f"Accuracy: {results['accuracy']:.2%}")
print(f"Correct: {results['total_correct']}/{results['total_examples']}")
```

> After running these examples, you'll see links in your terminal. Click any link to view traces in the Weave UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running these examples returns links to the traces in the terminal. Click any link to view traces in the Weave UI.
```

In the Weave UI, you can:

> - See a timeline of all your LLM calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Review a timeline of all your LLM calls
```

- Inspect inputs and outputs for each operation
- View token usage and estimated costs
- Analyze latency and performance metrics
- Compare different runs

## Available models

> For a complete list of available models, see the [Available Models section](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/inference/models/) in the W&B Inference reference documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
For a complete list of available models, see the [Available Models section](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/inference/models/) in the W&B Inference documentation.
```

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Get started with W&B Inference

> This guide shows you how to use W&B Weave with the W&B Inference service. You can build and trace LLM applications without setting up your own infrastructure or managing API keys from multiple providers.

Reviewer 2: I think you could lose "service".

> The W&B Inference service helps you learn Weave faster because:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
W&B Inference helps you learn Weave faster because:
```

> - You can start immediately without obtaining API keys from other providers

Reviewer 2: This probably should just be a para to help with list fatigue.

- You get access to multiple models in one place, making it easier to compare their behavior
- Your usage is automatically tracked, so you can see Weave's tracing features in action
- You work with the same models and APIs you might use in production

## What you'll learn

In this guide, you'll:
- Set up Weave and the W&B Inference service
- Build a simple LLM application with automatic tracing
- Compare multiple models
- Evaluate model performance on a dataset
- View your results in the Weave UI

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, you need:

> - A W&B account ([sign up free](https://app.wandb.ai/login?signup=true))

Author: Yeah removed

- Python 3.8 or later

> - Basic Python knowledge

Reviewer 2: This kind of seems obvious for our target audience, right?

Author: Changed the focus here to be on the required API key

## Step 1: Install Weave

Install the required libraries:

```bash
pip install weave openai
```

Get your W&B API key from [https://wandb.ai/authorize](https://wandb.ai/authorize).

> ## Step 2: Make your first traced LLM call

Reviewer 2: Should this be something like "trace your first call"?

Author: Catchy, I like it :)

Start with a simple example that uses Llama 3.1 8B through W&B Inference:

```python
import weave
import openai

# Initialize Weave - replace with your-team/your-project
weave.init("my-first-weave-project")

# Create an OpenAI-compatible client pointing to W&B Inference
client = openai.OpenAI(
    base_url='https://api.inference.wandb.ai/v1',
    api_key="YOUR_WANDB_API_KEY",  # Replace with your actual API key
    project="my-first-weave-project",  # Required for usage tracking
)

# Decorate your function to enable tracing
@weave.op()
def ask_llama(question: str) -> str:
    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a helpful assistant."},
            {"role": "user", "content": question}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

# Call your function - Weave automatically traces everything
result = ask_llama("What are the benefits of using W&B Weave for LLM development?")
print(result)
```

> When you run this code, Weave:

Reviewer 3: Move this to the top and/or add a sentence before the code sample that explains at a high level what's happening?

Author: Good call, done

        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "Extract 3-5 key points from the text. Return each point on a new line."},
            {"role": "user", "content": text}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content.strip().split('\n')

@weave.op()
def create_summary(text: str, key_points: list[str]) -> str:
    """Create a concise summary based on key points."""
    points_text = "\n".join([f"- {point}" for point in key_points])
    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "Create a 2-3 sentence summary based on these key points."},
            {"role": "user", "content": f"Key points:\n{points_text}"}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

@weave.op()
def summarize_text(text: str) -> dict:
    """Main summarization pipeline."""
    key_points = extract_key_points(text)
    summary = create_summary(text, key_points)
    return {
        "key_points": key_points,
        "summary": summary
    }

# Try it with sample text

> sample_text = """

Reviewer 2: This sample text in the middle of code could become less accurate over time. Maybe the sample text should not be about Weave itself.

    
    if expected_one_of:
        is_correct = any(option.lower() in output_clean for option in expected_one_of)
    else:
        is_correct = expected.lower() in output_clean
    
    return {"correct": is_correct, "score": 1.0 if is_correct else 0.0}

# Evaluate a model
@weave.op()
def evaluate_model(model: InferenceModel, dataset: list[dict]) -> dict:
    """Run evaluation on a dataset."""
    scores = []
    
    for example in dataset:
        # Get model prediction
        output = model.predict(example["question"])
        
        # Score the output
        score = accuracy_scorer(
            expected=example.get("expected", ""),
            output=output,
            expected_one_of=example.get("expected_one_of")
        )
        scores.append(score["score"])
    
    return {
        "model": model.model_name,
        "accuracy": sum(scores) / len(scores),
        "total_correct": sum(scores),
        "total_examples": len(dataset)
    }

# Run evaluation
results = evaluate_model(llama_model, dataset)
print(f"Model: {results['model']}")
print(f"Accuracy: {results['accuracy']:.2%}")
print(f"Correct: {results['total_correct']}/{results['total_examples']}")
```

> ## Step 6: View your results in Weave

Reviewer 2: This is a lot of steps, though it's not quite at the magic 7. I wonder if any of them could be combined.

After running these examples, you'll see links in your terminal. Click any link to view traces in the Weave UI.

In the Weave UI, you can:
- See a timeline of all your LLM calls
- Inspect inputs and outputs for each operation
- View token usage and estimated costs
- Analyze latency and performance metrics
- Compare different runs

![Weave Traces View](guides/tools/imgs/image.png)

## Available models

W&B Inference provides access to many models including Llama 3.1 8B for general-purpose tasks, Llama 3.3 70B for complex reasoning, DeepSeek V3 for language processing, and Qwen3 235B for mathematical and structured reasoning. 

> For a complete list of available models with specifications, context windows, pricing, and usage limits, see the [Available Models section](guides/tools/inference.md#available-models) in the W&B Inference reference documentation.

Reviewer 2: The first paragraph here is just asking to accumulate tech debt. Maybe avoid listing specific models.

Author: Yeah, removed

## Next steps

After completing this guide:

- **Use the Playground**: [Try models interactively](guides/tools/playground.md#access-the-playground) in the Weave Playground
- **Build evaluations**: Learn about [systematic evaluation](guides/core-types/evaluations.md) of your LLM applications
- **Try other integrations**: Weave works with [OpenAI, Anthropic, and many more](guides/integrations/index.md)
- **Deploy your app**: Use [Weave Serve](guides/tools/serve.md) to deploy your applications

## Troubleshooting

<details>
<summary>Authentication errors</summary>

If you get authentication errors:
1. Verify you have a valid W&B account
2. Check that you're using the correct API key from [wandb.ai/authorize](https://wandb.ai/authorize)
3. Ensure your project name follows the format `team-name/project-name`

</details>

<details>
<summary>Rate limit errors</summary>

W&B Inference has concurrency limits per project. If you hit rate limits:
- Reduce the number of concurrent requests
- Add delays between calls
- Consider upgrading your plan for higher limits

</details>

<details>
<summary>Running out of credits</summary>

> The free tier includes limited credits. To continue using W&B Inference:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The free tier includes limited credits. If you run out of credits, to continue using W&B Inference:
```

Author: Removed

> - Free users: [Upgrade to Pro](https://wandb.ai/subscriptions)
> - Pro users: Usage is billed monthly after free credits (default cap: $6,000/month)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Free users: [Upgrade to Pro](https://wandb.ai/subscriptions).
- Pro users: Usage is billed monthly after free credits.
```
I think we try hard to avoid having specific pricing details in docs, in favor of the main pricing page.

Author: Yeah, removed the details here.

> - Enterprise users: Contact your account executive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enterprise users: Contact your account team.
```

Author: Removed

> See the [pricing and limits documentation](guides/tools/inference.md#usage-information-and-limits) for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the [pricing and limits documentation](/guides/tools/inference.md#usage-information-and-limits) for details.
```

Author: Updated to point to core docs URL

    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a helpful assistant."},
            {"role": "user", "content": question}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

# Call your function - Weave automatically traces everything
result = ask_llama("What are the benefits of using W&B Weave for LLM development?")
print(result)
```

## Step 2: Build a text summarization application

Next, try running this code, which is a basic summarization app that shows how Weave traces nested operations:

```python
import weave
import openai

# Initialize Weave - replace with your-team/your-project
weave.init("my-first-weave-project")

@weave.op()
def extract_key_points(text: str) -> list[str]:
    """Extract key points from a text."""
    response = client.chat.completions.create(
        model="meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct",
        messages=[
            {"role": "system", "content": "Extract 3-5 key points from the text. Return each point on a new line."},
            {"role": "user", "content": text}
        ],
    )

>     return response.choices[0].message.content.strip().split('\n')

Reviewer 4: `splitlines()` is preferable to `split('\n')`. Also, at the risk of complicating the code we might want to filter out the blank lines so things look nicer in Weave?

<img width="996" height="354" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f879568e-44d6-4e26-9804-7eaf21bb2c10" />

            {"role": "user", "content": f"Key points:\n{points_text}"}
        ],
    )
    return response.choices[0].message.content

@weave.op()
def summarize_text(text: str) -> dict:
    """Main summarization pipeline."""
    key_points = extract_key_points(text)
    summary = create_summary(key_points)
    return {
        "key_points": key_points,
        "summary": summary
    }

# Try it with sample text
sample_text = """
The Apollo 11 mission was a historic spaceflight that landed the first humans on the Moon 
on July 20, 1969. Commander Neil Armstrong and lunar module pilot Buzz Aldrin descended 
to the lunar surface while Michael Collins remained in orbit. Armstrong became the first 
person to step onto the Moon, followed by Aldrin 19 minutes later. They spent about 
two and a quarter hours together outside the spacecraft, collecting samples and taking photographs.
"""

result = summarize_text(sample_text)
print("Key Points:", result["key_points"])
print("\nSummary:", result["summary"])
```

## Step 3: Compare multiple models

W&B Inference provides access to multiple models. Compare their performance:

```python
# Define a Model class to compare different LLMs

> class InferenceModel(weave.Model):

Reviewer 4: As with above, I'd add the imports etc to make this standalone, and indicate below that example #4 builds on it.

```python
from typing import Optional
from weave import EvaluationLogger

# Create a simple dataset
dataset = [
    {"question": "What is 2 + 2?", "expected": "4"},
    {"question": "What is the capital of France?", "expected": "Paris"},
    {"question": "Name a primary color", "expected_one_of": ["red", "blue", "yellow"]},
]

# Define a scorer
@weave.op()
def accuracy_scorer(expected: str, output: str, expected_one_of: Optional[list[str]] = None) -> dict:
    """Score the accuracy of the model output."""
    output_clean = output.strip().lower()
    
    if expected_one_of:
        is_correct = any(option.lower() in output_clean for option in expected_one_of)
    else:
        is_correct = expected.lower() in output_clean
    
    return {"correct": is_correct, "score": 1.0 if is_correct else 0.0}

# Evaluate a model using Weave's EvaluationLogger
def evaluate_model(model: InferenceModel, dataset: list[dict]):
    """Run evaluation on a dataset using Weave's built-in evaluation framework."""
    # Initialize EvaluationLogger BEFORE calling the model to capture token usage
    # This is especially important for W&B Inference to track costs
    eval_logger = EvaluationLogger(

>         model=model.model_name,

Reviewer 5: I think it might be more sane to do this validation in weave -- the reason for the model name constraint is internal to the weave implementation.

For posterity, that reason is because the name is currently used to generate an actual python class at runtime.

        dataset="qa_dataset"
    )
    
    for example in dataset:
        # Get model prediction
        output = model.predict(example["question"])
        
        # Log the prediction
        pred_logger = eval_logger.log_prediction(
            inputs={"question": example["question"]},
            output=output
        )
        
        # Score the output
        score = accuracy_scorer(
            expected=example.get("expected", ""),
            output=output,
            expected_one_of=example.get("expected_one_of")
        )
        
        # Log the score
        pred_logger.log_score(
            scorer="accuracy",
            score=score["score"]
        )
        
        # Finish logging for this prediction
        pred_logger.finish()
    
    # Log summary - Weave automatically aggregates the accuracy scores
    eval_logger.log_summary()
    print(f"Evaluation complete for {model.model_name}. View results in the Weave UI.")

> # Run evaluation for a single model

Reviewer 4: This depends on the model created in #3 - I think you could just remove the single model example personally. If you are going to depend on what was in #3 beyond the InferenceModel class you don't need to construct new InferenceModel objects below.
